---
layout: post
title: >-
  How Can We Prevent Algorithmic Bias in Artificial Intelligence Systems From
  Becoming Discrimination?
published: true
---
# How Can We Prevent Algorithmic Bias in Artificial Intelligence Systems From Becoming Discrimination? (Day 10 of Ken Jee's #66DaysOfData)

## 1. Introduction

Artificial Intelligence can be defined as 'the ability of a digital computer or computer-controlled robot to perform tasks commonly associated with intelligent beings', where such tasks rely upon the capability to 'reason, discover meaning, generalize, or learn from past experience' (Encyclopedia Britannica 1998, Artificial Intelligence). The rise of the use of artificial intelligence (AI) in recent years has been astronomical. In the coming decades, we can expect to see a continuation of this trend. Advancements made in the field of artificial intelligence continue to make the implementation and use of autonomous systems a possibility in more workplaces, decision making processes, consumer products and other applications. 

Despite the relevance of Artificial Intelligence in our day to day lives, there is a shocking lack of understanding of what it means for our future. In a survey conducted by Deloitte (2017), only 17% of 1,500 senior business leader respondents were familiar with the concept of AI and what it meant for their companies. While systems that are both autonomous and intelligent have exceptional potential to make our lives better in many different ways, there are also a multitude of ethical issues with the development and use of AI systems. Some of these problems include unemployment due to the automation of jobs, the gap in wealth equality created by machines and the weaponization of artificial intelligence. Another ethical issue presented to us by AI, and the focus of this report, is the potential for artificially intelligent and autonomous systems to introduce bias, and thus discrimination of all kinds into our lives.

We know that as humans we have the potential to harbour biases of different kinds. Depending on the nature of bias held, this may be for better or for worse. Bias in and of itself is not necessarily a bad thing. Buss (2016, p. 968) states that 'Because they [cognitive biases] depart from standards of logic and accuracy, they appear to be design flaws', however, we may assume that as we have evolved to utilise bias regularly, it may have 'contributed to fitness ancestrally.' As a result of this, 'it is not a design flaw—it is a design feature.' Much like a machine learning algorithm, our brains interpret the world around us to find patterns and make it easier and more efficient to process information in the future. Bias is, by definition, simply a deviation from what is the true standard. However, it is when bias crosses the border into discrimination on the basis of age, disability, race, gender, sexual orientation, faith and more that the matter of bias becomes a serious concern. Discrimination based on these factors should not, and by the moral zeitgeist of our time, are not tolerated in human cognitive biases. It is of utmost importance then that we aim to limit and prevent the occurence of discriminatory algorithmic bias that can arise in artificially intelligent autonomous systems.

The purpose of this report is to provide background analysis on what algorithmic bias is, how it happens, who it affects and how. It will detail the current legal recourse available relevant to the issue and how problems may be remedied where legal recourse is not a possibility. Furthermore, possible solutions to algorithmic bias will be discussed that could potentially solve the issue at its root cause, before delving into a case study that demonstrates the impact and consequences of bias in artificially intelligent systems.

## 2. Background Analysis

Algorithmic bias manifests itself in AI systems in a number of different ways. The first and most obvious way we may assume an algorithm to be biased is that it is explicity coded and developed to be biased. On the other hand,  'algorithmic bias exists even when there is no discrimination intention in the developer of the algorithm.  Sometimes it may be inherent to the data sources used' (Haijan, Bonchi & Castillo 2016, p. 2126). Artificial intelligence systems are trained on is often collected from and generated by humans. If the input training data used is not representative of the truth, the result can be a discriminatory AI system. We refer to this kind of bias as training data bias.

Algorithmic focus bias, closely related to training data bias, involves the use of 'morally irrelevant categories to make morally relevant judgments' (Danks and London 2012, p.4693). Take for example a machine learning solution developed to assist court judges in making a decision by providing an indication of whether a candidate is likely to re-offend following their hearing. The system could in theory be trained on data such as ethnic background. While it may, alongside a number of other training variables, assist in providing a more accurate likelihood of the defendant re-offending, we know that it is wrong to make assumptions based on this kind of information. Differences in crime rates between ethnic backgrounds are not a result of skin colour but racial circumstance such as social disadvantage and wealth inequality. With the aid of a biased system that discriminates against people based on race, a judge is likely to unknowingly make an ill-informed decision.

Not even artificially Intelligent systems that may be developed with the best of intentions are safe from the dangers of harboring damaging bias. Live, online machine learning applications can be subject to malicious attacks by those who wish to intentionally sabotage the purity of training data. A coordinated attack can be used to influence an AI system's training data and produce bias. Artificially Intelligent systems that apply Machine Learning strategies become what we teach them. When Microsoft created a social chat-bot called Tay to conduct research on conversational understanding of AI agents, users were able to manipulate Tay and influence it to express disgustingly violent,  anti-semetic and sexist views within 24 hours of its online deployment (Carolina Alves de Lima Salge and Nicholas Berente 2017).

Furthermore, each of these issues has the potential to be amplified through positive feedback loops. Mansoury et al. (2020) found that if the result produced by an AI system is fed back to itself as a source of training data, it is likely to further amplify an existing bias. This phenomenon is especially apparent in recommender systems. For instance, job seekers using online job markets that utilise artificial intelligence processes to recommend jobs to applicants based on their profile may find that 'ads for high-income jobs are presented to men much more often than to women' (Haijan, Bonchi & Castillo 2016, p. 2126).

There are many stakeholders involved in this issue. Everything begins with the developers of the algorithm. Software developers, artificial intelligence and machine learning engineers are responsible for ensuring that they do not explicitly write algorithms that produce discriminatory bias. The owners of the algorithms, in many cases also the developer of them, are also responsible for ensuring that an algorithm is not at risk of ensuring an AI or autonomous system discriminates against any one class of people. The final and most important group of stakeholders in the issue are those using and being affected by discriminatory AI. While discriminatory commercial AI products often have non-discriminatory alternatives that allow consumers to avoid their use, in many other applications cases individuals have no choice but to be subject to or be involved in the use of one of these systems.

This issue calls into question some important ethical values. First and most clearly, discriminatory bias, human or not, is a violation of fairness and equality between classes of people. Algorithms should not treat people differently on the basis of age, disability, race, gender, sexual orientation and so on where the result of such treatment is not beneficial for said people. In addition to this, the way in which these algorithms operate can abuse the trust of those involved through a lack of transparency and openness. Machine learning approaches especially often make it difficult to understand why an AI system may behave the way it does. Without knowledge of why an autonomous system takes a particular action or makes a certain decision, we cannot trust that it acts in a non-discriminatory way. Outcomes of these systems must be understandable and explainable for individuals subject to them (Australian Human Rights Commission 2020).

Without technology, discrimination of all kinds is already present in society. Should this problem continue to go unresolved, we could see a widespread extension of this existing discrimination into the technology that becomes more and more integral to our lives each year.

## 3. Legal Recourse Available in Australia

Australia has very thorough anti-discrimination legislation that has been incrementally strengthened over a number of decades to include coverage of at least four protected attributes in environments of public life such as education and employment. Human discrimination is addressed by the following legislation: Racial Discrimination Act 1975, Sex Discrimination Act 1984, Disability Discrimination Act 1992 and Age Discrimination Act 2004. The Australian Government insists that unlawful discrimination under the aforementioned legislation should be referred to the Australian Human Rights Commisssion (AHRC) (Australian Government: Attorney General's Department).

In the United States, legislative effort has been made to regulate AI systems. 'The Algorithmic Accountability Act of 2019' would provide explicit legal instruction for 'entities that develop, acquire, and/or utilize AI' to be 'cognizant of the potential for biased decision-making and outcomes resulting from its use' and to 'mitigate such potential biases and take corrective action when it is found' (Jones Day 2019, para. 1-3). In spite of this, no such legislation has been drafted or even considered here in Australia.

Not all hope is lost though for the protection of Australians from discriminatory artificial intelligence. According to the AHRC, Australians recieve coverage under existing laws. Despite a lack of legislation on the matter, the AHRC places the obligation to ensure no harm comes to those who use or are involved in the use of the technology with the businesses and people that design them. The AHRC insists that 'Businesses that use these tools to assist in their decision-making processes must be accountable for their design and deployment' and 'Anyone designing or using these AI systems should be alert to erroneous or unjustified differential treatment between groups and take steps to mitigate algorithmic bias' (The Australian Human Rights Commission 2020).

## 4. Possible Solutions

Dealing with algorithmic bias should not be delayed until it becomes a legal issue. There are multiple solutions to algorithmic bias that we can implement at the source to mitigate its discriminatory effects. The AHRC (2020) provides a three-level system for the responsible use of AI and data in business in particular, involving the acquisition and processing of data, the design of artificial intelligence systems and finally constant monitoring of AI systems following deployment and during use.

A preventative solution to algorithmic bias is to ensure that prior to deployment and use of these algorithms, they are critically analysed by both the developing party and external parties to determine whether the system is free from discriminatory outcomes. Questions must be asked of the system to ensure only necessary factors are made part of its design. Are only factors relevant to solving the problem incorporated into the system's design? Is the algorithm's logical process biased in any way that may produce a discriminatory outcome? Are there protected attributes such as race, age or gender under consideration by the system, and if so, are they used appropriately and treated fairly? Depending on the severity and impact of the AI system in question, increased oversight will be required to ensure that it meets the standard set by anti-discrimination laws. 

The issue of training data bias can be solved by eliminating bias from training data itself. According to Joy Buolamwini (2017), by using more diversified training sets that incorporate a full spectrum of the true population, we can ensure that our AI systems make decisions and recommendations that more closely represent our world. As mentioned earlier, bias in our training data manifests itself in the output of the system. Therefore, if we can train algorithms on a diverse and representative dataset we are more likely to produce AI systems free from discriminatory bias. When training machine learning algorithms, developers should aim to use a training sample that is representative of the true population, rather than one that is over-representative of some classes while not doing enough to account for others.

Formal implementation of these solution should involve the instruction of a central governing body or legislation being drafted. Such documents should requires businesses and other entities developing AI systems to follow a clearly defined process to ensure that the algorithms they make are inspected in detail for flaws that could introduce discrimination on the basis of any protected classes. They should also demand that algorithms are both explainable and understandable to the point that any recommendation or decision made by the AI can be justified by logic and rationalized. This would make businesses and other entities developing algorithms accountable for the algorithms they write and use in their products, while also creating a clear point of reference for entities looking for guidelines to follow so that they may avoid engaging in discrimination upon protected classes.

## 5. Case Study

The impact of algorithmic bias can be demonstrated through the exploration of a fictional case study that follows an individual through their journey to find a job.

Catherine is currently un-employed after her former employer closed its doors and let go all of its workers. She had worked at her previous job in consultancy for over two decades. Catherine decides she'd like to do something else and forge a new career path, so after taking some online courses and attending a number of intensive coding bootcamps, she decides to start looking for a job as a software engineer.

Catherine begins her job search by opening an online job marketplace. She makes an account, informing the website that she is a 57 year-old female. Catherine is bucking the trend by entering the technology field in a number of ways. She far exceeds the average age of software engineers in Australia by over 20 years and her female peers form only 12% of the software engineers (Australian Government: Job Outlook). Algorithmic job ad platforms are committed to helping companies find job seekers that are a good fit for their company, but also to make their investment in using the platform an efficient one. In aiming to do so, algorithms make biased assumptions about which kind of individuals are likely to click on and apply for a particular job ad, and thus which job ads are shown to which individuals. As a result of this, Catherine is highly unlikely to be shown as many relevant job ads as her younger, male counterparts. Despite the fact that the job ad platform may not intend to keep older women out of the software engineering field, bias in the training data from past users of the platform does exactly this. 

In a study of discrimination in online employment and recruiting, Kim and Scott (2018) claim that Facebook collects hundreds of thousands of datapoints on each of their users which can be used by advertisers to decide which users will see their ads. Even if Catherine decides to hide her age and gender, companies can target applicants based on characteristics and data that do not contradict any laws of discrimination, but that are closely tied to those protected classes, circumventing the need to categorise by age and gender.

After a doing some digging agains the will of the online job ad platform, Catherine is able to find some software engineering roles that she feels qualified enough to apply for. She uploads her resume and it is reviewed not by a real human, but by an artifical intelligence system programmed to read and analyse resumes. Bogen (2019) states that these autonomous resume reviewers use machine learning techniques to assess resumes and compare them to applicants who have been hired in the past and have proved themselves as good employees. Due to Catherine being a minority in the field she is applying, it is likely that her resume could be scored poorly or even entirely rejected before it even meets the eye of a hiring manager. 

While this may not prevent Catherine from finding a job eventually, it will certain be a serious hurdle that impacts the likelihood of her finding the best job that she is qualified for. Age discrimination against applicants is already a serious enough problem in the technology field as it is, the last thing somebody like Catherine wants to have to worry about are the biased and discriminatory algorithms blocking her from getting a foot in the door. Unfortunately for Catherine, there is no immediate solution that she may use to remedy this problem. She could use alternate pathways to apply for jobs to avoid discrimination, but that would mean excluding herself from a wealth of opportunity in the online job market. To make this right, Catherine must rely upon the online job ad platforms and employers to make their hiring processes more fair.

Online hiring platforms should work to ensure that algorithms for job ad recommendation systems are trained on data that is diverse and able to make accurate recommendations without the use of protected classes such as age, gender, race, faith and so on. The logic used in the algorithm should be reviewed and tested comprehensively to ensure that it does not allow for discriminatory results. Should these activities not be possible, the most appropriate solution would be to decrease the amount of autonomy given to the algorithm and incorporate a human-in-the-loop where possible to reguate the algorithm's behaviour.

## 6. Conclusion

In light of all this, the severity and seriousness of discriminatory bias in artificial intelligence systems has been clearly demonstrated. Ending discrimination in algorithms starts with ending discrimination in each and every individual, as our inherent bias can in practice live on in the technology that we produce and use. The impact that this has on the marginalized of protected classes is not to be underestimated. Applications of Artificial Intelligence can be truly beautiful things that provide much prosperity and benefit to us as a human race, and so we must do our best to eliminate the ugly.

This topic requires further research to ensure that the goal of preventing bias from becoming discrimination is met. Sub-topics for further exploration may include autonomous discrimination recognition, development of an objective process for defining when a system harbours discriminatory bias and investigation into who should be held responsible when live online machine learning applications produce discriminatory results after being trained to do so by malicious attackers.